docs/DRIVER.md, before:

# RA8875 device driver

This driver provides MicroPython access to a subset of the capabilities of the
RA8875 chip. The subset was chosen to be close to the minimum functionality
required to support the touch GUI display. The `ra8875.py` driver provides an
`RA8875` class. This is usable for applications other than the GUI and could
readily be extended to support additional primitives provided by the chip.

The GUI subclasses `RA8875` to provide a `TFT` class. This handles 'greying
out' of disabled widgets by modifying the colors passed to the superclass
methods, also methods for rendering strings and displaying vectors. For
convenience `TFT` is documented here.

The RA8875 documentation is not the world's best and the chip has bugs. The
driver was written by referring to a number of sources, notably the Adafruit
libraries; data values for display control registers were copied from their
code. Accordingly the use of their displays is highly recommended: other units
may not be electrically compatible with the driver. See
[references](./DRIVER.md#4-references) for details of the supported hardware
and for the sources of information used.

###### [GUI docs](./GUI.md)

# 1. The TFT class

### Terminology

Where `color` is specified this is an `(r, g, b)` tuple where r, g and b are in
range 0 to 255 inclusive. `fgcolor` and `bgcolor` represent foregound and
background colors.

Text styles are 3-tuples comprising `(fgcolor, bgcolor, font)`. `font` may be
the name of an imported Python font or an instance of an internal font (defined
in `constants.py`).

### Class

Constructor. This takes the following mandatory arguments.  
 1. `spi` An initialised SPI bus instance.
 2. `pincs` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used for chip select.
 3. `pinrst` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used to perform a hardware reset.
 4. `width` Display width and height. Supported values are 480x272 and 800x480.
 5. `height`
 6. `tdelay` Touch delay (in ms). If a value > 0 is passed, the GUI suppresses
 multiple touches by delaying responses. See [section 3](./DRIVER.md#3-chip-limitations).
 7. `loop` An event loop instance or `None`. In the latter case the touch panel
 will be inoperative.

Methods.
 1. `get_fgcolor` Return system `fgcolor`.
 2. `get_bgcolor` Return system `bgcolor`.
 3. `text_style` Arg `style`. Accepts a text style, returns one with colors
 modified by the current greyed-out status.
 4. `desaturate` Arg `value=None`. If a `bool` is passed, defines whether
 greying-out is done by dimming (`False`) or desaturating (`True`) objects. By
 default the current status is returned.
 5. `dim` Arg `factor=None` If a numeric value is passed, sets the amount of
 dimming to be used if this option is selected. A typical value is 2, meaning
 that the brightness of colors is halved. Returns the current factor.
 6. `usegrey` Arg `val`. Set current greyed-out status. If `True` is passed,
 subsequent pixels will be rendered with the specified `color` modified to the
 current greyed-out style. If `False` is passed they will be rendered normally.
 Note that `desaturate` and `dim` methods set the grey style. They only affect
 rendering when the greyed-out status is set via `usegrey`.
 7. `print_centered` Args `x, y, s, style`. Renders string `s` centred at
 `x, y`.
 8 `print_left` Args `x, y, s, style, tab=32`. Renders string `s` starting at
 `x, y`. The `tab` value represents the size of a tab stop in pixels.
 9. `draw_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a rectangle.
 10. `fill_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled rectangle.
 11. `draw_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a clipped
 rectangle.
 12. `fill_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled clipped
 rectangle.
 13. `draw_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a circle.
 14. `fill_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a filled circle.
 15. `draw_vline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a vertical line length `l`.
 16. `draw_hline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a horizontal line length `l`.
 17. `draw_line` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a line from `x1, y1` to
 `x2, y2`.

# 2. The RA8875 class

Colors are specified as (r, g, b) tuples. They are converted to 16 bit RGB565
values by the `RA8875._to_rgb565` private static method.

Constructor. This takes the following mandatory arguments.  
 1. `spi` An initialised SPI bus instance.
 2. `pincs` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used for chip select.
 3. `pinrst` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used to perform a hardware reset.
 4. `width` Display width and height. Supported values are 480x272 and 800x480.
 5. `height`
 6. `loop=None` An event loop instance or `None`.

If `loop` is supplied the constructor launches a `._dotouch` asynchronous
method which handles the touch panel. If `None` is passed this will not be run:
the touch panel will be inoperative.

Display methods required for GUI:  
 1. `clr_scr` No args. Clear screen (all pixels off). In testing this sometimes
 filled the screen with a color; `fill_rectangle` is reliable.
 2. `draw_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a rectangle.
 3. `fill_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled rectangle.
 4. `draw_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a clipped
 rectangle.
 5. `fill_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled clipped
 rectangle.
 6. `draw_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a circle.
 7. `fill_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a filled circle.
 8. `draw_vline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a vertical line length `l`.
 9. `draw_hline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a horizontal line length `l`.
 10. `draw_line` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a line from `x1, y1` to
 `x2, y2`.
 11. `draw_glyph` Args `mv, x, y, rows, cols, fgcolor, bgcolor` The `mv` arg is
 a `memoryview` into a `bytes` object holding a glyph bitmap. The bitmap uses
 one bit per pixel as a horizontally mapped array. It is rendered at `x, y` and
 the glyph is organised as `rows, cols`. Rendering uses the supplied foreground
 and background colors.
 12. `draw_str` Args `s, x, y, fgcolor, bgcolor, scale=0` Render a string `s`
 at location `x`, `y` using the RA8875 internal font. Rendering uses the
 supplied foreground and background colors. Glyphs are fixed-pitch and default
 to 8 bits wide by 16 high. They can be scaled by factors of 2, 3 or 4 by
 passing `scale` values of 1-3.

Touchpanel (TP) methods required by GUI:  
 1. `ready` No args. Returns `True` if TP data is available.
 2. `touched` No args. Returns `True` if TP is currently being touched.
 3. `get_touch` No args. Return touch panel data `x, y` as screen coordinates.
 Caller should check `ready` before calling. The returned coordinates will be
 raw values unless `calibrate` has been called, when they will be adjusted.

Additional methods:  
 1. `calibrate` Args `xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax` Apply user-specified calibration
 values to future touchpanel readings. See below.
 2. `width` No args. Return display width in pixels.
 3. `height` No args. Return display height in pixels.
 4. `draw_pixel` Args `x, y, color` draw a single pixel.


### Calibration

The user runs `cal.py` to determine the reported coordinates of the top left
and bottom right of the display. The code in `tft_local.py` is modified to call
`.calibrate` with those values.

This ensures that the GUI acquires corrected coordinates from the touch panel.

# 3. Chip limitations

The RA8875 touch interface has an unexpected behaviour. A single brief touch
always appears as at least two touch events with different coordinates. The
last of these seems to be the correct one (subject to calibration). The driver
makes no attempt to mitigate this. The setting of the debounce bit had no
evident effect on this behaviour. This can cause flicker as widgets update
multiple times. The `TFT` constructor arg `tdelay` attempts to mitigate this by
delaying any response untile `tdelay` ms after the last touch event.

The RA8875 claims to provide a means of reading back the contents of the frame
buffer. This seems broken. I removed functionality which aimed to support it as
the outcome was not deterministic. GUI controls which formerly relied on this
were redesigned so as not to need it.

As stated above the `clear_scr` method is not reliable. Despite conforming to
the datasheet it sometimes fills the screen with a non-black color.

# 4. References

[CircuitPython library](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_RA8875)
written by Melissa LeBlanc-Williams for Adafruit Industries.
[Arduino library](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_RA8875) written by
Limor Fried/Ladyada for Adafruit Industries.
[Datasheet](https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/RA8875_DS_V19_Eng.pdf)
[App note](https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ra8875+app+note.pdf)

[This driver](https://github.com/sumotoy/RA8875/blob/0.70/RA8875.cpp) by Max Mc
Costa.

Supported hardware

[Controller board](https://www.adafruit.com/product/1590)  
[4.3 inch display](https://www.adafruit.com/product/1591)  
[7 inch display](https://www.adafruit.com/product/2354)

Commit message:

System defaults now in constants.py

docs/DRIVER.md, after:

# RA8875 device driver

This driver provides MicroPython access to a subset of the capabilities of the
RA8875 chip. The subset was chosen to be close to the minimum functionality
required to support the touch GUI display. The `ra8875.py` driver provides an
`RA8875` class. This is usable for applications other than the GUI and could
readily be extended to support additional primitives provided by the chip.

The module `tft.py` subclasses `RA8875` to provide a `TFT` class. This provides
a compatibility layer between the GUI and the driver. It handles 'greying out'
of disabled widgets by modifying the colors passed to the superclass methods
and methods for rendering strings. `TFT` is documented here.

The RA8875 documentation is not the world's best and the chip has bugs. The
driver was written by referring to a number of sources, notably the Adafruit
libraries; data values for display control registers were copied from their
code. Accordingly the use of their displays is highly recommended: other units
may not be electrically compatible with the driver. See
[references](./DRIVER.md#4-references) for details of the supported hardware
and for the sources of information used.

###### [GUI docs](./GUI.md)

# 1. The TFT class

### Terminology

Where `color` is specified this is an `(r, g, b)` tuple where r, g and b are in
range 0 to 255 inclusive. `fgcolor` and `bgcolor` represent foregound and
background colors.

Text styles are 3-tuples comprising `(fgcolor, bgcolor, font)`. `font` may be
the name of an imported Python font or an instance of an internal font (defined
in `constants.py`).

### Class

Constructor. This takes the following mandatory arguments.  
 1. `spi` An initialised SPI bus instance.
 2. `pincs` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used for chip select.
 3. `pinrst` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used to perform a hardware reset.
 4. `width` Display width and height. Supported values are 480x272 and 800x480.
 5. `height`
 6. `tdelay` Touch delay (in ms). If a value > 0 is passed, the GUI suppresses
 multiple touches by delaying responses. See [section 3](./DRIVER.md#3-chip-limitations).
 7. `loop` An event loop instance or `None`. In the latter case the touch panel
 will be inoperative.

Methods.
 1. `text_style` Arg `style`. Accepts a text style, returns one with colors
 modified by the current greyed-out status.
 2. `desaturate` Arg `value=None`. If a `bool` is passed, defines whether
 greying-out is done by dimming (`False`) or desaturating (`True`) objects. By
 default the current status is returned.
 3. `dim` Arg `factor=None` If a numeric value is passed, sets the amount of
 dimming to be used if this option is selected. A typical value is 2, meaning
 that the brightness of colors is halved. Returns the current factor.
 4. `usegrey` Arg `val`. Set current greyed-out status. If `True` is passed,
 subsequent pixels will be rendered with the specified `color` modified to the
 current greyed-out style. If `False` is passed they will be rendered normally.
 Note that `desaturate` and `dim` methods set the grey style. They only affect
 rendering when the greyed-out status is set via `usegrey`.
 5. `print_centered` Args `x, y, s, style`. Renders string `s` centred at
 `x, y`.
 6 `print_left` Args `x, y, s, style, tab=32`. Renders string `s` starting at
 `x, y`. The `tab` value represents the size of a tab stop in pixels.
 7. `draw_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a rectangle.
 8. `fill_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled rectangle.
 9. `draw_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a clipped
 rectangle.
 10. `fill_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled clipped
 rectangle.
 11. `draw_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a circle.
 12. `fill_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a filled circle.
 13. `draw_vline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a vertical line length `l`.
 14. `draw_hline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a horizontal line length `l`.
 15. `draw_line` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a line from `x1, y1` to
 `x2, y2`.

Static method:
 1. `get_stringsize` Args: `s, font`. Returns the metrics of a string `s` as a
 2-tuple comprising `(rows, cols)` in pixels.

In methods 7-15 the passed `color` will be modified before rendering if the
current status is greyed-out.

# 2. The RA8875 class

Colors are specified as (r, g, b) tuples. They are converted to 16 bit RGB565
values by the `RA8875._to_rgb565` private static method.

Constructor. This takes the following mandatory arguments.  
 1. `spi` An initialised SPI bus instance.
 2. `pincs` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used for chip select.
 3. `pinrst` An initialised `Pin` instance defined for output with initial value
 of 1. Used to perform a hardware reset.
 4. `width` Display width and height. Supported values are 480x272 and 800x480.
 5. `height`
 6. `loop=None` An event loop instance or `None`.

If `loop` is supplied the constructor launches a `._dotouch` asynchronous
method which handles the touch panel. If `None` is passed this will not be run:
the touch panel will be inoperative.

Display methods required for GUI:  
 1. `clr_scr` No args. Clear screen (all pixels off). In testing this sometimes
 filled the screen with a color; `fill_rectangle` is reliable.
 2. `draw_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a rectangle.
 3. `fill_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled rectangle.
 4. `draw_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a clipped
 rectangle.
 5. `fill_clipped_rectangle` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a filled clipped
 rectangle.
 6. `draw_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a circle.
 7. `fill_circle` Args `x, y, radius, color` Draw a filled circle.
 8. `draw_vline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a vertical line length `l`.
 9. `draw_hline` Args `x, y, l, color` Draw a horizontal line length `l`.
 10. `draw_line` Args `x1, y1, x2, y2, color` Draw a line from `x1, y1` to
 `x2, y2`.
 11. `draw_glyph` Args `mv, x, y, rows, cols, fgcolor, bgcolor` The `mv` arg is
 a `memoryview` into a `bytes` object holding a glyph bitmap. The bitmap uses
 one bit per pixel as a horizontally mapped array. It is rendered at `x, y` and
 the glyph is organised as `rows, cols`. Rendering uses the supplied foreground
 and background colors.
 12. `draw_str` Args `s, x, y, fgcolor, bgcolor, scale=0` Render a string `s`
 at location `x`, `y` using the RA8875 internal font. Rendering uses the
 supplied foreground and background colors. Glyphs are fixed-pitch and default
 to 8 bits wide by 16 high. They can be scaled by factors of 2, 3 or 4 by
 passing `scale` values of 1-3.

Touchpanel (TP) methods required by GUI:  
 1. `ready` No args. Returns `True` if TP data is available.
 2. `touched` No args. Returns `True` if TP is currently being touched.
 3. `get_touch` No args. Return touch panel data `x, y` as screen coordinates.
 Caller should check `ready` before calling. The returned coordinates will be
 raw values unless `calibrate` has been called, when they will be adjusted.

Additional methods:  
 1. `calibrate` Args `xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax` Apply user-specified calibration
 values to future touchpanel readings. See below.
 2. `width` No args. Return display width in pixels.
 3. `height` No args. Return display height in pixels.
 4. `draw_pixel` Args `x, y, color` draw a single pixel.


### Calibration

The user runs `cal.py` to determine the reported coordinates of the top left
and bottom right of the display. The code in `tft_local.py` is modified to call
`.calibrate` with those values.

This ensures that the GUI acquires corrected coordinates from the touch panel.

# 3. Chip limitations

The RA8875 touch interface has an unexpected behaviour. A single brief touch
always appears as at least two touch events with different coordinates. The
last of these seems to be the correct one (subject to calibration). The driver
makes no attempt to mitigate this. The setting of the debounce bit had no
evident effect on this behaviour. This can cause flicker as widgets update
multiple times. The `TFT` constructor arg `tdelay` attempts to mitigate this by
delaying any response untile `tdelay` ms after the last touch event.

The RA8875 claims to provide a means of reading back the contents of the frame
buffer. This seems broken. I removed functionality which aimed to support it as
the outcome was not deterministic. GUI controls which formerly relied on this
were redesigned so as not to need it.

As stated above the `clear_scr` method is not reliable. Despite conforming to
the datasheet it sometimes fills the screen with a non-black color.

# 4. References

[CircuitPython library](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_RA8875)
written by Melissa LeBlanc-Williams for Adafruit Industries.
[Arduino library](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_RA8875) written by
Limor Fried/Ladyada for Adafruit Industries.
[Datasheet](https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/RA8875_DS_V19_Eng.pdf)
[App note](https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/ra8875+app+note.pdf)

[This driver](https://github.com/sumotoy/RA8875/blob/0.70/RA8875.cpp) by Max Mc
Costa.

Supported hardware

[Controller board](https://www.adafruit.com/product/1590)  
[4.3 inch display](https://www.adafruit.com/product/1591)  
[7 inch display](https://www.adafruit.com/product/2354)
